-1/3 to 48% of population have clinical diagnosis at some point in life 
-Assess what symptoms are there and which are not 
Symptoms on a continuum 
 
-People with psychosis don’t think their symptoms are different 
Paranoia, delusions, etc 
 
-Theories of psychopathology 
Kraepelin (German) VS Meyer (American) 
K believed psychopathology was heritable 
Connected biology and genes 
M believed psychopathology was a product of environmental stress 
Environmental factors (in alignment with Freudian psychology) 
"Schizophrenogenic parent"   
Categories VS Dimensions 
Categories very rigid  
Strict boundaries of symptoms and then can determine causes and treatments 
Labels are beneficial to a certain extent 
Dimensions flow across boundaries and symptoms cross boundaries 
Difficult to have strict lines between symptoms 
Evidence for both and dichotomy between the 2 
Multi-factoral 
Diathesis – Stress Model 
Related to genetics and environmental conditions 
Underlying genetic factors that are influenced by environment  
Genes associated with many disorders 
Endophenotype – genes not readily observed but symptoms are overtly seen 
Not deterministic but influential  
-Question: 
What? 
How many? 
Outcome or prognosis? 
Cause or etiology? 
Treatment? 
Policy or advocacy? 
-Increase in diagnosis over the years 
Not more pathology but maybe overdiagnosis? 
Insurance coverage? 
Who's' coming to treatment? 
Many people with disorders don’t come to treatment 
-Mental Disorder 
Hard to define because of the use of clinical judgement 
-Health VS Illness 
Severity 
How severe are symptoms 
Extent 
Number of symptoms  or areas of disability 
Duration 
How long have symptoms persisted 
-Differential diagnosis (First Article) 
Rule out malingering and factitious disorders 
Rule of substance abuse 
Substances can mimic psychopathology 
Rule out medical condition 
Determine specific primary disorders 
Differentiating adjustment disorder from residual specified or unspecified disorders 
Establish boundary with no mental disorder 
Use decision tree 
 
Psychosis 
-Positive Symptoms (on a continuum) (SAPS Handout by Dr. Andreasen) 
Delusions 
Are some delusions more severe than others? 
How bizarre are the thoughts? 
Ex: someone following individual VS radio waves from moon coming down and influencing behavior 
Thought congruence and incongruence 
Hallucinations 
False perceptions with regards to the senses 
Auditory (most common) 
Disorganized speech 
Bizarre Behavior 
Clothing and appearance 
Social and sexual behavior 
Aggression and agitated behavior 
Repetitive and stereotyped behavior 
Positive formal thought disorder 
Derailment 
Tangentially 
Incoherence 
Illogicality 
Circumstancialities 
Pressure of speech 
Distractible speech 
Clanging 
**Those with thought disorder can recognize in others but not in the self** 
Grossly disorganized behavior 
Ex: wearing winter clothes in the middle of summer 
-Negative Symptoms 
Lumped more than positive symptoms 
 
-How to determine cultural and spiritual beliefs from actual delusions? 
Within that culture, is this normal? 
Is the belief shared with others on the culture/population? 
Not abnormal is shared by group 
Do other people believe what they're believing? 
How much information are you getting as a clinician? 
Can be beneficial to chip away at beliefs rather than cutting it completely 